You've just learned how to validate against a schema
during marshalling and unmarshalling.
It's also possible to validate JAXB objects in memory against a schema without
marshalling or unmarshalling the objects to or from XML.
This is useful if you have created a set of JAXB objects,
for example, using data coming from a database,
and you just want to check if they contain valid and complete data
before processing them any further in your application.
Let's take a look at example ps-jaxb-24-validation-2 to see how this works.
Like in the previous examples,
we first have to create a SchemaFactory from which we
create a schema object for our XSD.
Then we can create a validator for the schema by calling
the newValidator on the schema object.
The validator has a validate method, which you'll need to pass a source object.
We've used a source object before in one of the examples earlier in the course.
Interface Source is actually from the XML transformation API,
and it represents an object that acts as a source of XML data.
There are different implementations of Interface Source
available for the different Java XML APIs,
for example, DOMSource, SAXSource, StAXSource,
and StreamSource, and there's also a class,
JAXBSource.
Since we're working with JAXB here, we'll of course use the JAXBSource,
which we create here by passing it the JAXB context and
the root of our JAXB object tree, which is the purchaseOrder object.
The validator will validate whatever the source object provides,
which is, in this case, our JAXB object tree in memory,
starting with the purchaseOrder object.
When a validation error occurs, the validator will throw an exception.
But just like we saw in the previous example,
it's also possible to set a custom validation error handler.
You can do this by calling setErrorHandler on the validator.
The ErrorHandler is different, though, than what we saw in the previous examples.
In the previous examples,
the ErrorHandler was a class that implements interface ValidationEventHandler,
which is a JAXB-specific interface.
Instead of a ValidationEventHandler,
we now have to make the ErrorHandler a class that implements
interface ErrorHandler from the package org.
xml.
sax, so it's actually part of the SAX API.
This interface defines three methods named warning,
error, and fatalError, which will be called during validation when a warning,
error, or fatal error occurs.
If you want validation to stop,
then you should make these methods throw a SAX exception.
In the ExampleErrorHandler, the methods just bring the message.
As you can see, Java's XML APIs are sometimes a bit messy.
There are several different APIs for parsing,
and then there's the XML transformation API and the XML validation API,
and they sometimes use each other's classes and interfaces.
For example, interface Source, which is in the package javax.
xml.
transform, is used by the validation API,
and the validation API also uses the SAX-specific interface
ErrorHandler for reporting validation errors.
It's not all designed in a perfectly clean and logical way.
The reason why it is a bit messy like this is mainly historic.
Different XML APIs have been added to different Java versions over time, and newer APIs have often reused APIs that already existed at that point.